docs/index.md, before:

# Basil

Basil is a complete application framework and command-line tool for Go.

## Libraries

### Ptr
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/ptr)

`ptr` is a helper package for getting pointer to values. It eliminates the need for defining a new variable.

### Factory
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/testing/factory)

`factory` is a helper package for generating random values for standard built-in types.

### Health
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/health)

`health` is a minimal package for implementing health checks for services.

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/health/example).

#### Behaviour

Here is how the handler returned from `HandlerFunc()` behaves:

  1. A new context with a *timeout* will be derived from the request context.
  1. The `CheckHealth()` method of all registered *Checkers* will be called each in a new goroutine.
      - If at least one of the check fails, the handler responds with `503` status code.
      - Only the failed checks will be logged (if logging enabled).

### Graceful
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/graceful)

`graceful` is a minimal package for building a graceful service. It implements an opinionated workflow for:

  - Gracefully opening long-lived connections
  - Gracefully retrying dropped connections
  - Gracefully starting servers to listen
  - Gracefully terminating all connections and listeners

A *client* is any kind of long-lived connection that needs to be preserved
during a service's operation (gRPC connection, database connection, message queue connection, etc.).
A *server* is any kind of listener that needs to listen to a port and serve requests (HTTP server, gRPC server, etc.).

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/graceful/example).

#### Behaviour

Here is how the `StartAndWait` behaves:

  1. It tries to connect all clients each in a new goroutine.
      - If a client fails to connect, it will be automatically retried for a limited number of times with exponential backoff.
      - If at least one client fails to connect (after retries), a graceful termination will be initiated.
  1. Once all clients are connected successfully, all servers start listening each in a new goroutine.
      - If any server errors, a graceful termination will be initiated.
  1. Then, this method blocks the current goroutine until one of the following conditions happen:
      - If any of `SIGHUP`, `SIGINT`, `SIGQUIT`, `SIGTERM` signals is sent, a graceful termination will be initiated.
      - If any of the above signals is sent for the second time before the graceful termination is completed, the process will exit immediately with an error code.

### Config
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/config)

config is a minimal and unopinionated utility for reading configuration values based on [The 12-Factor App](https://12factor.net/config).

The idea is that you just define a `struct` with _fields_, _types_, and _defaults_,
then you just use this library to read and populate the values for fields of your struct
from either **command-line flags**, **environment variables**, or **configuration files**.
It can also watch for new values read from _configuration files_ and notify subscribers.

This library does not use `flag` package for parsing flags, so you can still parse your flags separately.

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/config/example).

| Example | Description | asciinema |
|---------|-------------|-----------|
| Basic | Using `Pick` method | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296495) |
| Watch | Watching for new configurations | |
| Kubernetes | Changing the *log level* without restarting the *pods* | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296509) |
| Telepresence | Running an application in a [Telepresence](https://telepresence.io) session | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296511) |

#### Supported Types

  - `string`, `*string`, `[]string`
  - `bool`, `*bool`, `[]bool`
  - `float32`, `float64`
  - `*float32`, `*float64`
  - `[]float32`, `[]float64`
  - `int`, `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`
  - `*int`, `*int8`, `*int16`, `*int32`, `*int64`
  - `[]int`, `[]int8`, `[]int16`, `[]int32`, `[]int64`
  - `uint`, `uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, `uint64`
  - `*uint`, `*uint8`, `*uint16`, `*uint32`, `*uint64`
  - `[]uint`, `[]uint8`, `[]uint16`, `[]uint32`, `[]uint64`
  - `url.URL`, `*url.URL`, `[]url.URL`
  - `regexp.Regexp`, `*regexp.Regexp`, `[]regexp.Regexp`
  - `time.Duration`, `*time.Duration`, `[]time.Duration`

#### Behaviour

The precedence of sources for reading values is as follows:

  1. command-line flags
  1. environment variables
  1. configuration files
  1. default values (set when creating the instance)

You can pass the configuration values with **flags** using any of the syntaxes below:

```bash
main  -enabled  -log.level info  -timeout 30s  -address http://localhost:8080  -endpoints url1,url2,url3
main  -enabled  -log.level=info  -timeout=30s  -address=http://localhost:8080  -endpoints=url1,url2,url3
main --enabled --log.level info --timeout 30s --address http://localhost:8080 --endpoints url1,url2,url3
main --enabled --log.level=info --timeout=30s --address=http://localhost:8080 --endpoints=url1,url2,url3
```

You can pass the configuration values using **environment variables** as follows:

```bash
export ENABLED=true
export LOG_LEVEL=info
export TIMEOUT=30s
export ADDRESS=http://localhost:8080
export ENDPOINTS=url1,url2,url3
```

You can also write the configuration values in **files** (or mount your configuration values and secrets as files)
and pass the paths to the files using environment variables:

```bash
export ENABLED_FILE=...
export LOG_LEVEL_FILE=...
export TIMEOUT_FILE=...
export ADDRESS_FILE=...
export ENDPOINTS_FILE=...
```

The supported syntax for Regexp is [POSIX Regular Expressions](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Regular_Expressions/POSIX_Basic_Regular_Expressions).

#### Skipping

If you want to skip a source for reading values, use `-` as follows:

```go
type Config struct {
  GithubToken string `env:"-" fileenv:"-"`
}
```

In the example above, `GithubToken` can only be set using `github.token` command-line flag.

#### Customization

You can use Go _struct tags_ to customize the name of expected command-line flags or environment variables.

```go
type Config struct {
  Database string `flag:"config.database" env:"CONFIG_DATABASE" fileenv:"CONFIG_DATABASE_FILE_PATH"`
}
```

In the example above, `Database` will be read from either:

  1. The command-line flag `config.databas`
  2. The environment variable `CONFIG_DATABASE`
  3. The file specified by environment variable `CONFIG_DATABASE_FILE_PATH`
  4. The default value set on struct instance

#### Using `flag` Package

`config` plays nice with `flag` package since it does NOT use `flag` package for parsing command-line flags.
That means you can define, parse, and use your own flags using built-in `flag` package.

If you use `flag` package, `config` will also add the command-line flags it is expecting.
Here is an example:

```go
package main

import (
  "flag"
  "time"

  "github.com/gardenbed/basil/config"
)

var config = struct {
  Enabled   bool
  LogLevel  string
} {
  Enabled:  true,   // default
  LogLevel: "info", // default
}

func main() {
  config.Pick(&config)
  flag.Parse()
}
```

If you run this example with `-help` or `--help` flag,
you will see `-enabled` and `-log.level` flags are also added with descriptions!

#### Options

Options are helpers for specific situations and setups.
You can pass a list of options to `Pick` and `Watch` methods.
If you want to test or debug something and you don't want to make code changes, you can set options through environment variables as well.

| Option | Environment Variable | Description |
|--------|----------------------|-------------|
| `config.Debug()` | `CONFIG_DEBUG` | Printing debugging information. |
| `config.ListSep()` | `CONFIG_LIST_SEP` | Specifying list separator for all fields with slice type. |
| `config.SkipFlag()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_FLAG` | Skipping command-line flags as a source for all fields. |
| `config.SkipEnv()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_ENV` | Skipping environment variables as a source for all fields .|
| `config.SkipFileEnv()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_FILE_ENV` | Skipping file environment variables (and configuration files) as a source for all fields. |
| `config.PrefixFlag()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_FLAG` | Prefixing all flag names with a string. |
| `config.PrefixEnv()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_ENV` | Prefixing all environment variable names with a string. |
| `config.PrefixFileEnv()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_FILE_ENV` | Prefixing all file environment variable names with a string. |
| `config.Telepresence()` | `CONFIG_TELEPRESENCE` | Reading configuration files in a _Telepresence_ environment. |

#### Debugging

If for any reason the configuration values are not read as you expected, you can view the debugging logs.
You can enable debugging logs either by using `Debug` option or by setting `CONFIG_DEBUG` environment variable.
In both cases you need to specify a verbosity level for logs.

| Level | Descriptions                                               |
|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0`   | No logging (default).                                      |
| `1`   | Logging all errors.                                        |
| `2`   | Logging initialization information.                        |
| `3`   | Logging information related to new values read from files. |
| `4`   | Logging information related to notifying subscribers.      |
| `5`   | Logging information related to setting values of fields.   |
| `6`   | Logging miscellaneous information.                         |

#### Watching

config allows you to watch _configuration files_ and dynamically update your configurations as your application is running.

When using `Watch()` method, your struct should have a `sync.Mutex` field on it for synchronization and preventing data races.
You can find an example of using `Watch()` method [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/config/example/3-watch).

[Here](https://milad.dev/posts/dynamic-config-secret) you will find a real-world example of using `config.Watch()`
for **dynamic configuration management** and **secret injection** for Go applications running in Kubernetes.

### Telemetry
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry)

This package can be used for building observable applications in Go.
It aims to unify the three pillars of observability in one single package that is *easy-to-use* and *hard-to-misuse*.

This package leverages the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) API.
OpenTelemetry is a great initiative that has brought all different standards and APIs for observability under one umbrella.
However, due to the requirements for interoperability with existing systems, OpenTelemetry is highly abstract and complex.
Many packages, configurations, and options make the developer experience not so pleasant.
Furthermore, due to the changing nature of this project, OpenTelemetry specification changes often so does the Go library for OpenTelemetry.
Currently, the tracing API is *stable*, the metric API is in *alpha* stage, and the logging API is *frozen*.

IMHO, this is not how a single unified observability API should be.
Hopefully, many of these issues will go away once all APIs reache to v1.0.0.
This package intends to provide a very minimal and yet practical API for observability
by hiding the complexity of configuring and using OpenTelemetry API.

A probe encompasses a logger, meter, and tracer.
It offers a unified developer experience for building observable applications.

#### Quick Start

You can find basic examples [here][here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/telemetry/example).

#### Options

Most options can be set through environment variables.
This lets SRE people change how the observability pipeline is configured without making any code changes.
Options set explicity in the code will override those set by environment variables.

| Environment Variable | Description |
|----------------------|-------------|
| `PROBE_NAME` | The name of service or application. |
| `PROBE_VERSION` | The version of service or application. |
| `PROBE_TAG_*` | Each variable prefixed with `PROBE_TAG_` represents a tag for the service or application. |
| `PROBE_LOGGER_ENABLED` | Whether or not to create a logger (boolean). |
| `PROBE_LOGGER_LEVEL` | The verbosity level for the logger (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, or `none`). |
| `PROBE_PROMETHEUS_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create a Prometheus meter (boolean). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create a Jaeger tracer (boolean). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_AGENT_HOST` | The Jaeger agent host (i.e. `localhost`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_AGENT_PORT` | The Jaeger agent port (i.e. `6832`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_ENDPOINT` | The full URL to the Jaeger HTTP Thrift collector (i.e. `http://localhost:14268/api/traces`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_USERNAME` | The username for Jaeger collector endpoint if basic auth is required. |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_PASSWORD` | The password for Jaeger collector endpoint if basic auth is required. |
| `PROBE_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create an OpenTelemetry Collector meter and tracer (boolean). |
| `PROBE_OPENTELEMETRY_COLLECTOR_ADDRESS` | The address to OpenTelemetry collector (i.e. `localhost:55680`). |

Commit message:

Add telemetry http and grpc packages

docs/index.md, after:

# Basil

Basil is a complete application framework and command-line tool for Go.

## Libraries

### Ptr
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/ptr)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/ptr)

`ptr` is a helper package for getting pointer to values. It eliminates the need for defining a new variable.

### Factory
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/factory)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/factory)

`factory` is a helper package for generating random values for standard built-in types.

### Health
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/health)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/health)

`health` is a minimal package for implementing health checks for services.

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/health/example).

#### Behaviour

Here is how the handler returned from `HandlerFunc()` behaves:

  1. A new context with a *timeout* will be derived from the request context.
  1. The `CheckHealth()` method of all registered *Checkers* will be called each in a new goroutine.
      - If at least one of the check fails, the handler responds with `503` status code.
      - Only the failed checks will be logged (if logging enabled).

### Graceful
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/graceful)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/graceful)

`graceful` is a minimal package for building a graceful service. It implements an opinionated workflow for:

  - Gracefully opening long-lived connections
  - Gracefully retrying dropped connections
  - Gracefully starting servers to listen
  - Gracefully terminating all connections and listeners

A *client* is any kind of long-lived connection that needs to be preserved
during a service's operation (gRPC connection, database connection, message queue connection, etc.).
A *server* is any kind of listener that needs to listen to a port and serve requests (HTTP server, gRPC server, etc.).

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/graceful/example).

#### Behaviour

Here is how the `StartAndWait` behaves:

  1. It tries to connect all clients each in a new goroutine.
      - If a client fails to connect, it will be automatically retried for a limited number of times with exponential backoff.
      - If at least one client fails to connect (after retries), a graceful termination will be initiated.
  1. Once all clients are connected successfully, all servers start listening each in a new goroutine.
      - If any server errors, a graceful termination will be initiated.
  1. Then, this method blocks the current goroutine until one of the following conditions happen:
      - If any of `SIGHUP`, `SIGINT`, `SIGQUIT`, `SIGTERM` signals is sent, a graceful termination will be initiated.
      - If any of the above signals is sent for the second time before the graceful termination is completed, the process will exit immediately with an error code.

### Config
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/config)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/config)

config is a minimal and unopinionated utility for reading configuration values based on [The 12-Factor App](https://12factor.net/config).

The idea is that you just define a `struct` with _fields_, _types_, and _defaults_,
then you just use this library to read and populate the values for fields of your struct
from either **command-line flags**, **environment variables**, or **configuration files**.
It can also watch for new values read from _configuration files_ and notify subscribers.

This library does not use `flag` package for parsing flags, so you can still parse your flags separately.

#### Quick Start

You can find examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/config/example).

| Example | Description | asciinema |
|---------|-------------|-----------|
| Basic | Using `Pick` method | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296495) |
| Watch | Watching for new configurations | |
| Kubernetes | Changing the *log level* without restarting the *pods* | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296509) |
| Telepresence | Running an application in a [Telepresence](https://telepresence.io) session | [Watch](https://asciinema.org/a/296511) |

#### Supported Types

  - `string`, `*string`, `[]string`
  - `bool`, `*bool`, `[]bool`
  - `float32`, `float64`
  - `*float32`, `*float64`
  - `[]float32`, `[]float64`
  - `int`, `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`
  - `*int`, `*int8`, `*int16`, `*int32`, `*int64`
  - `[]int`, `[]int8`, `[]int16`, `[]int32`, `[]int64`
  - `uint`, `uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, `uint64`
  - `*uint`, `*uint8`, `*uint16`, `*uint32`, `*uint64`
  - `[]uint`, `[]uint8`, `[]uint16`, `[]uint32`, `[]uint64`
  - `url.URL`, `*url.URL`, `[]url.URL`
  - `regexp.Regexp`, `*regexp.Regexp`, `[]regexp.Regexp`
  - `time.Duration`, `*time.Duration`, `[]time.Duration`

#### Behaviour

The precedence of sources for reading values is as follows:

  1. command-line flags
  1. environment variables
  1. configuration files
  1. default values (set when creating the instance)

You can pass the configuration values with **flags** using any of the syntaxes below:

```bash
main  -enabled  -log.level info  -timeout 30s  -address http://localhost:8080  -endpoints url1,url2,url3
main  -enabled  -log.level=info  -timeout=30s  -address=http://localhost:8080  -endpoints=url1,url2,url3
main --enabled --log.level info --timeout 30s --address http://localhost:8080 --endpoints url1,url2,url3
main --enabled --log.level=info --timeout=30s --address=http://localhost:8080 --endpoints=url1,url2,url3
```

You can pass the configuration values using **environment variables** as follows:

```bash
export ENABLED=true
export LOG_LEVEL=info
export TIMEOUT=30s
export ADDRESS=http://localhost:8080
export ENDPOINTS=url1,url2,url3
```

You can also write the configuration values in **files** (or mount your configuration values and secrets as files)
and pass the paths to the files using environment variables:

```bash
export ENABLED_FILE=...
export LOG_LEVEL_FILE=...
export TIMEOUT_FILE=...
export ADDRESS_FILE=...
export ENDPOINTS_FILE=...
```

The supported syntax for Regexp is [POSIX Regular Expressions](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Regular_Expressions/POSIX_Basic_Regular_Expressions).

#### Skipping

If you want to skip a source for reading values, use `-` as follows:

```go
type Config struct {
  GithubToken string `env:"-" fileenv:"-"`
}
```

In the example above, `GithubToken` can only be set using `github.token` command-line flag.

#### Customization

You can use Go _struct tags_ to customize the name of expected command-line flags or environment variables.

```go
type Config struct {
  Database string `flag:"config.database" env:"CONFIG_DATABASE" fileenv:"CONFIG_DATABASE_FILE_PATH"`
}
```

In the example above, `Database` will be read from either:

  1. The command-line flag `config.databas`
  2. The environment variable `CONFIG_DATABASE`
  3. The file specified by environment variable `CONFIG_DATABASE_FILE_PATH`
  4. The default value set on struct instance

#### Using `flag` Package

`config` plays nice with `flag` package since it does NOT use `flag` package for parsing command-line flags.
That means you can define, parse, and use your own flags using built-in `flag` package.

If you use `flag` package, `config` will also add the command-line flags it is expecting.
Here is an example:

```go
package main

import (
  "flag"
  "time"

  "github.com/gardenbed/basil/config"
)

var config = struct {
  Enabled   bool
  LogLevel  string
} {
  Enabled:  true,   // default
  LogLevel: "info", // default
}

func main() {
  config.Pick(&config)
  flag.Parse()
}
```

If you run this example with `-help` or `--help` flag,
you will see `-enabled` and `-log.level` flags are also added with descriptions!

#### Options

Options are helpers for specific situations and setups.
You can pass a list of options to `Pick` and `Watch` methods.
If you want to test or debug something and you don't want to make code changes, you can set options through environment variables as well.

| Option | Environment Variable | Description |
|--------|----------------------|-------------|
| `config.Debug()` | `CONFIG_DEBUG` | Printing debugging information. |
| `config.ListSep()` | `CONFIG_LIST_SEP` | Specifying list separator for all fields with slice type. |
| `config.SkipFlag()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_FLAG` | Skipping command-line flags as a source for all fields. |
| `config.SkipEnv()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_ENV` | Skipping environment variables as a source for all fields .|
| `config.SkipFileEnv()` | `CONFIG_SKIP_FILE_ENV` | Skipping file environment variables (and configuration files) as a source for all fields. |
| `config.PrefixFlag()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_FLAG` | Prefixing all flag names with a string. |
| `config.PrefixEnv()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_ENV` | Prefixing all environment variable names with a string. |
| `config.PrefixFileEnv()` | `CONFIG_PREFIX_FILE_ENV` | Prefixing all file environment variable names with a string. |
| `config.Telepresence()` | `CONFIG_TELEPRESENCE` | Reading configuration files in a _Telepresence_ environment. |

#### Debugging

If for any reason the configuration values are not read as you expected, you can view the debugging logs.
You can enable debugging logs either by using `Debug` option or by setting `CONFIG_DEBUG` environment variable.
In both cases you need to specify a verbosity level for logs.

| Level | Descriptions                                               |
|-------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0`   | No logging (default).                                      |
| `1`   | Logging all errors.                                        |
| `2`   | Logging initialization information.                        |
| `3`   | Logging information related to new values read from files. |
| `4`   | Logging information related to notifying subscribers.      |
| `5`   | Logging information related to setting values of fields.   |
| `6`   | Logging miscellaneous information.                         |

#### Watching

config allows you to watch _configuration files_ and dynamically update your configurations as your application is running.

When using `Watch()` method, your struct should have a `sync.Mutex` field on it for synchronization and preventing data races.
You can find an example of using `Watch()` method [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/config/example/3-watch).

[Here](https://milad.dev/posts/dynamic-config-secret) you will find a real-world example of using `config.Watch()`
for **dynamic configuration management** and **secret injection** for Go applications running in Kubernetes.

### Telemetry
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry)

This package can be used for building observable applications in Go.
It aims to unify the three pillars of observability in one single package that is *easy-to-use* and *hard-to-misuse*.

This package leverages the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) API.
OpenTelemetry is a great initiative that has brought all different standards and APIs for observability under one umbrella.
However, due to the requirements for interoperability with existing systems, OpenTelemetry is highly abstract and complex.
Many packages, configurations, and options make the developer experience not so pleasant.
Furthermore, due to the changing nature of this project, OpenTelemetry specification changes often so does the Go library for OpenTelemetry.
Currently, the tracing API is *stable*, the metric API is in *alpha* stage, and the logging API is *frozen*.

IMHO, this is not how a single unified observability API should be.
Hopefully, many of these issues will go away once all APIs reache to v1.0.0.
This package intends to provide a very minimal and yet practical API for observability
by hiding the complexity of configuring and using OpenTelemetry API.

A probe encompasses a logger, meter, and tracer.
It offers a unified developer experience for building observable applications.

#### Quick Start

You can find basic examples [here][here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/telemetry/example).

#### Options

Most options can be set through environment variables.
This lets SRE people change how the observability pipeline is configured without making any code changes.
Options set explicity in the code will override those set by environment variables.

| Environment Variable | Description |
|----------------------|-------------|
| `PROBE_NAME` | The name of service or application. |
| `PROBE_VERSION` | The version of service or application. |
| `PROBE_TAG_*` | Each variable prefixed with `PROBE_TAG_` represents a tag for the service or application. |
| `PROBE_LOGGER_ENABLED` | Whether or not to create a logger (boolean). |
| `PROBE_LOGGER_LEVEL` | The verbosity level for the logger (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, or `none`). |
| `PROBE_PROMETHEUS_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create a Prometheus meter (boolean). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create a Jaeger tracer (boolean). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_AGENT_HOST` | The Jaeger agent host (i.e. `localhost`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_AGENT_PORT` | The Jaeger agent port (i.e. `6832`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_ENDPOINT` | The full URL to the Jaeger HTTP Thrift collector (i.e. `http://localhost:14268/api/traces`). |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_USERNAME` | The username for Jaeger collector endpoint if basic auth is required. |
| `PROBE_JAEGER_COLLECTOR_PASSWORD` | The password for Jaeger collector endpoint if basic auth is required. |
| `PROBE_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED` | Whether or not to configure and create an OpenTelemetry Collector meter and tracer (boolean). |
| `PROBE_OPENTELEMETRY_COLLECTOR_ADDRESS` | The address to OpenTelemetry collector (i.e. `localhost:55680`). |

### HTTP Telemetry
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry/http)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry/http)

This package can be used for building observable HTTP servers and clients.
It provides _middleware_ for wrapping http handlers and a drop-in http client to report logs, metrics, and traces out-of-the-box.

#### Quick Start

You can find basic examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/telemetry/http/example).

### gRPC Telemetry
[![Go Doc](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry/grpc)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/gardenbed/basil/telemetry/grpc)

This package can be used for building observable [gRPC](https://grpc.io) servers and clients.
It uses _interceptors_ to intercept gRPC handlers and calls to report logs, metrics, and traces out-of-the-box.

#### Quick Start

You can find basic examples [here](https://github.com/gardenbed/basil/tree/main/telemetry/grpc/example).
